[Music]
over the last five years I've been lucky
enough to speak with some of the most
incredible people in the world and when
I listened to past episodes one thing
that stands out to me is how well the
insights from these conversations stand
that test of time there is relevant and
insightful today as they were when they
were originally recorded and in a world
that encourages a treadmill of
perishable information it's worth
revisiting wisdom that doesn't expire so
a few times a year we'll go back to
earlier episodes some of which you may
have missed some of which you may have
forgotten and pull out some gems around
a single theme the theme for this
episode is philosophy you'll hear Ryan
holiday explain how most mistakes are
rooted in anger and learned stoic
practices to resist those Temptations
then Emily belches talks about the
perception reality Gap and how what you
choose to see and focus on in life can
actually be used to increase
productivity in your world and life I've
used this and it's a massive Game
Changer then Neil pastrisha will teach
you the three elements of happiness and
how practicing gratitude may be the best
Habit to cultivate in your life Nancy
Sherman will chime in with the three
layers of emotion according to the
stoics and explain how stoic philosophy
is much deeper than just embracing the
sock which is the common wisdom and
having your emotions under control then
Derek Siver is one of my favorite guests
one of my favorite people we'll talk
about the importance of ignoring the
noise of information and focusing on
personal directives in life and finally
Ed Latimore will teach you about the
most important element for creating
happiness and self-development than
almost everyone gets wrong and explains
how happiness isn't a rate but a rate of
change
it's time to listen and learn
from episode 128 here is Ryan holiday
going on to the next sort of topic how
can we learn to manage our anger I was
thinking about this with a a course that
we made for daily stoic I was saying
that like just because you don't have an
anger problem doesn't mean that anger is
not a problem for you right like when I
look at most of the mistakes that I made
most of the things that I regret most of
the things that I wish I could undo
usually anger is a pretty big part of
that right like anger was a driving
factor in why I wrote the email and sent
it right it was why I uh chose not to do
X Y or Z or you know it's why I was
speaking this way or that way so I think
you know the the question about anger is
like does it actually make you better at
what you do it it may in the short term
right and and to go to our Point earlier
about sustainability is it fuel uh that
that can get you where you want to go
over the long term or is it really
corrosive and usually I tend to find
that it's pretty corrosive fuel so
I think if we just start with like
let let me make sure I'm not lying to
myself about my temper right because a
lot of us tell ourselves like oh uh it's
because I really care or it's what
drives me I'm not as bad as my boss or
my dad or whatever but like if you
really step back and you said like what
is this actually adding and what are the
costs that it's coming at it usually
becomes pretty illustrative that it's
it's not a positive force in our lives
what are the other sources of mistakes
when you you find yourself making
mistakes are there other sort of like
common themes to those that you can pull
out well the stoics talk about the
passions right and you know today
obviously we talk about passion being a
good thing but I would say at the root
of most mistakes both personally and
sort of historically
um it's one of the passions right Envy
lust anger fear uh you know pain uh
worry you know the those sort of
emotional states that take us out of the
rational part of ourselves and into some
sort of frenzied or flurried or consumed
part you know what I mean yeah the way
that I think about that is they sort of
like they nudge us against reason right
so they make us more instinctive and
less reasoning at the same time and
those are the very moments that humans
unlike any other sort of mammal can you
know like any other animal can actually
like no I'm gonna put a two second pause
on this and I'm gonna think before I
instinctively respond because those
instincts might have served me really
well in the savannah but they're not
necessarily going to serve me well here
because I'm about to do something that
can't be unsaid or can't be undone or I
remember reading about this in lives of
the stoic which I have right here about
the well I think it was the Emperor who
stabbed the guy with his pen in the eye
right in a fit of rage and then he
couldn't undo it no and it's often uh
precisely the situations in which we are
overcome by Passion we have the slimmest
margin for error it's like I've talked
to people about this about anger
specifically let's say like politically
especially right now
it's no question like what's happening
in the world is is appalling and
frustrating and uh in some cases like
downright evil so you have to ask
yourself okay like so you're looking at
this person who's in the way of what you
see as progress so either
let's say it's an individual person
we're talking about vaccines or masks or
it's some politician who's you know
styming some important bit of
legislation either they mean well and
are massively misinformed right in which
case anger let's say is not going to
convince them yeah or they are
pathologically evil
in which case you can't afford to be
angry because they're not angry right
like they're pathologically evil uh or a
narcissist or toxic or or whatever and
so the idea that you can afford not to
be hyper rational and strategic and in
control of all of your faculties you're
in really bad shape I think you could
argue that
what Trump does and I don't think this
has to get political what Trump does is
uh I don't think it's uh so much a
function of Genius on his part so much
as a Confluence of personality traits so
enrages his opponents and disorients
them and is so the opposite of what they
have experienced dealing with that it's
almost like a self-protective bubble
right because it it's like he's inside
the loop of the opponent and because
they're not thinking rationally
patiently strategically they're just
like ah yeah that's your operating
system right like he's literally just
hacked your brain and he's making you
respond in a way that's advantageous to
him and disadvantageous to you how do we
overcome that like how in the moment do
you like is there any stoic advice or
anything that you've learned where it's
like do you take I think there's one
quote about sort of like reciting the
alphabet before you respond yeah there's
all these tactical tips that we've
learned as adults like don't send the
email leave it as a draft read it again
in the morning well it's funny one of
the advisors to the emperor Octavian is
this stoic athenadoris and he actually
says this he's like look as the emperor
you will be provoked you will be angry
he's like but I want you to recite the
letter of every letter of the alphabet
before you do anything and I love that
that's like 2 000 year old piece of
advice that you would also give your
seven-year-old and yet the most powerful
man in the world needs it too the idea
of the pause I think is super important
in all things right because like very
rarely are is that immediate uh solution
the right one I think we talked about
Kennedy earlier you think about the
Cuban Missile Crisis
um you know he was able to string out a
nuclear standoff over 13 days but it was
only by stretching It Out by using the
time by talking about it by talking
through it but it allows not just his
own advisors to sort of see things in in
a better light but he allows his
opponent to come to their senses too and
I don't think that would have been
possible compressed into three days uh
George Washington is one of his favorite
Expressions it actually comes from a
line about the stoic Cato you know he
says I want to look at everything in the
calm light of mild philosophy and I
think that's being rational that's being
empathetic that's being not frantic or
rushed and I think it's important to
point out like people who knew George
Washington were like he has a horrible
temper you know he is an impulsive
deeply passionate human being but that
it's that he got control of those things
because his positions demanded it so
this isn't a like oh I just have a good
temperament kind of thing it's like you
have to cultivate that temperament
particularly if you're in some position
of leadership or responsibility and you
can't practice it in the moment where
it's it's the most difficult right like
you have to practice it in these little
somebody slights you you know almost on
the playground you're like whatever like
these are the moments where you practice
your response because when it's large
when you're on the stage when the lights
are on and when everybody's watching you
that's not when you want to practice you
want to have that instinctive response
well it's like if you haven't practiced
it in the little areas it's very
unlikely you're going to be able to do
it like when the game is on the line or
your career is on the line or like the
eyes of the world are upon you totally
from episode number 154 here is Emily
belches certain people see the world in
a certain way and maybe something looks
easier to them than it does to somebody
else where we can hack this talk to me a
little bit about maybe the relationship
between what we see and maybe what we
accomplish or our motivation to do it
yeah so
I guess at the
of our long-standing lines of research
is one trying to understand well what
are sources of problems as people are
trying to get stuff done in this world
the goals that they care most about
um you know as a motivation psychologist
which I am also you know a lot of work
has been done trying to understand well
maybe people just really don't care you
know maybe they actually aren't as
motivated on the things that they're
working towards than they should be so
let's increase motivation yeah that's
part of it maybe they are doing
themselves a disservice they're talking
to themselves in ways that aren't
helpful like you know they're putting
themselves down or they don't really
believe in themselves enough to be able
to get the job done we're Our Own Worst
Enemy when it comes to self-sabotaging
kinds of language yeah that's part of it
and we can change those things but that
those changes don't help enough to push
people in some cases literally over the
Finish Line if we're talking about the
context of exercise so we we're taking
that idea that I had said 20 years ago I
was so naive to think I had discovered
um and applied it to the kind context of
exercise and tried to think okay maybe
there's something about exercise that
not everybody sees it the same way of
course we don't all think about exercise
the same way I like exercising my
husband hates it he's a very fit person
which is annoying that he can hate
exercise and yet still be quite fit he
burns his calories when he sleeps it's
so weird and he's so lucky but that's
because it's not fun right so like we
all know those kinds of examples where
we think about exercise in different
ways but maybe there is something about
the visual experience when exercising
that is helpful for some people and
might be part of the problem for others
who are struggling to do it at the level
that they want so one so that's one of
the questions that motivated a a big
line of work that we've been engaged in
is trying to think okay when it comes to
exercise distance perception is
something that really matters that you
know we have to assess how much energy
do I have how much motivation do I have
and how far do I need to go and trying
to regulate that get those two in sync
with one another
so one of the first places that we
started looking was you know how do
people perceive distance and is it
related to something about their bodies
or about their motivation we spent a
long time
um looking through the literature to see
how do people study distance perception
coming up with their own measures as
well as using those from the past
to see not just what do people think
about distance but how are they really
seeing distances
and some of the things that we found
regardless of what measures we were
using was that people who weigh more we
Index this by waist to hip ratio and by
BMI to metrics that the medical
community uses to index people's
um weight status or to diagnose weight
status and we found that people who have
a higher waist to hip Ratio or a higher
BMI C distance is as farther than people
who have a lower waist to hip Ratio or
lower BMI those distances literally look
farther to people that for whom it might
be harder to to make it to that finish
line to navigate that space
um we also found that that's the case
with motivation that when people are
more motivated to exercise or to make it
to that finish line that motivation can
in a sense compensate for that effect of
their body on their perception of
distance so that even highly motivated
people people who are highly motivated
even if they have a higher waist to hip
ratio might see the distance in a way
that suggests it's just as short as
people who have a lower waist to hip
ratio so motivation can change our
visual experience and align people
um to experience a a world that looks
more like a person who'd have an easier
time navigating it so those were like
you know two initial findings that sets
of findings that that suggested our
visual experiences are not just
reflective of the world that's out there
right but instead it has to do with what
is our body capable of doing and what is
our brain capable of supplementing our
own motivational States and and physical
uh states of our body are working
together to shift what it is that we're
seeing in the world out there
now you couple that with like around
this time they had the opportunity to
talk with some amazing athletes some
Olympic athletes some of the world's
fastest Runners like the fastest guy out
of Trinidad
um someone else who's trained against
Hussein lightning bolt like these are
amazing accomplished athletes uh and and
I was wondering like what are they doing
like what what's happening with their
eyes as they are running and like I have
no expectation that if I just interview
them and then uh and adopt what they say
that I'll be able to do what they have
done of course not but I just wanted to
get some insight from some really
accomplished people
now my intuition going into this Con
these conversations
um was that they would say that they
have like amazing powers of perception
they could see in front of them on the
sides behind them you know I know that's
not physically possible but that's just
what I thought would happen that they
knew exactly where they were relative to
their competition that they could do
something with their peripheral vision
that maybe I couldn't do but that's not
at all I was totally wrong
they said they had this sort of hyper
Focus that you know for shorter runs
um that they just focused on the Finish
Line as if there was you know a
spotlight shining just on that finish
line and that they weren't paying any
attention at all to their peripheral
vision uh when it was longer runs that
they would choose a Target up ahead and
focus on that until they hit it and then
they would choose another Target and
that seemed to resonate with other sort
of Memoirs that I was reading about
accomplished athletes as well like
marathon runners would take that
approach
so then I thought okay visual experience
does seem to be implicated in how
they're moving their body at these
amazing paces and what they're talking
about is something that we can teach
other people to do we're not gonna We're
not gonna be able to take somebody who
you know is really struggling to be in
shape and turn them into a gold medalist
that's not the point here that's not
most people's goal but can we improve
their experience in some way by teaching
them to do with their eyes with these
Olympic athletes are doing the answer is
yes you can tell people just like I have
you to focus their attention choose a
Target imagine there's a spotlight
shining just on it don't pay much
attention to what's in your periphery
almost as if you have like blinders on
right so don't pay attention to those
distractors
people can do that we have them talk to
us about like what is it that you're
focused on what's catching your
attention right now those are easy
instructions to understand and it's easy
to make your eyes do it what's important
though is that that's not what their
eyes do naturally when they're walking
or when they're running people do take a
sort of wider perspective they broaden
their scope of attention relative to
what these instructions are having them
do
and when we taught people that narrowed
style of attention what we found is that
they moved 23 percent faster in this
course that we had set up from the start
line to the Finish Line it was always
exactly the same distance and we were
using our stopwatches to see how fast
did they move they moved 23 faster and
they said it hurt 17 less
right so exactly the same actual
experience but subjectively it was
easier and they performed better they
increase the efficiency of this
particular exercise
now of course that's not going to make
people you know one bout of of efficient
exercises and going to change people's
body body composition or help that won't
have them meet a health goal they need
to do this over time but what we also
found is that if we taught them that
strategy and tested its impact right
here in front of us when we're watching
and then tell them now go out and
exercise over the course of the next
week and do you mind if we check out
your Fitness uh tracking app what we
find is that people who have been
trained in that narrowed focus of
attention go out for more walks they
take more steps and they walk faster in
each walk so we've improved the
efficiency of their exercise even when
we're not there to monitor what they're
doing
and even when they're like compensation
isn't contingent on what they're doing
it's just like hey if you could go you
know go for some walks and go for some
or some runs and and then let us see how
it's going for you using the strategy
that we talked to you about
now why does that happen I think that's
pretty amazing that that does happen
because it's not magic it's about
changing people's psychology yes we're
changing what their eyes are doing
that's changing their visual experience
of the landscape but that then has
psychological consequences
people when they see that when they
experience that finish line is closer or
the stop sign that they've focused on or
the building that they've always hoped
that they could walk to that their
focused their attention on is closer
that changes their mindset now it
doesn't seem so hard because now it
looks close it looks closer to me they
believe in themselves they have a sense
of self-efficacy that is higher now the
task doesn't seem so difficult they
believe they have the resources to take
on this challenge there's a host of
cascading sort of psychological effects
that comes from that misperception of
proximity that visual illusion of
Greater proximity changes their
psychology that then is what translates
into the improved performance
so here really to understand like you
know how do we get people to exercise
better one is that we want to induce
that perception reality Gap it's not
something to be afraid of or to think is
a deficiency it's an opportunity
actually it's an opportunity for some
sort of self-trickery self-deception
here that can work to our advantage once
we know we are capable of changing our
eyes that can change our psychology that
can change our performance why not
Embrace this this perception reality Gap
and use it as a source of of power and
control and opportunity
from episode number 72 here is Neil
pasrisha you've written broadly on three
topics so gratitude happiness and
resilience yes we've talked a lot about
resilience
walk me through how these fit together
and why these three particular topics
how they came to be sure and let's sort
of go through gratitude and happiness
too sure
um so my wife left me my best friend
took his own life I started a Blog
called 1000awesomethings.com for a
thousand straight days I wrote about one
simple pleasure in life things like
wearing warm underwear from under the
dryer
uh getting called up to the dinner
buffet first at a wedding which is huge
at an Indian wedding because there's 500
tables uh you know hitting a string
green lights when you're late for work
just little things I expand on them in
500 word essays ish and for a thousand
straight days I posted it the blog went
viral it took off it turned into my
first book which is the book of awesome
that book therefore is all about
gratitude it isn't one of these
academics that book became a New York
Times bestseller yeah yeah exactly yeah
I sold a million copies and um it was
number one I think for 100 straight
weeks on the globe mailbox list why do
you think it was number one why do you
think it resonated so much with people
the weirdest advice or the weirdest
compliment I ever got two things two you
know how people say stuff about your own
work and then sometimes they say stuff
that helps you see it in a different way
Mark Manson once said this to me in my
pockets he's like you know when someone
wrote this about my subtle or not give
me a it made me realize what I was
doing right so two compliments stuck out
for me Shane one is this is the only
self-help book I've ever bought that
doesn't tell me what to do it shows me
how to do it
like I'm not saying oh sit around your
dinner table every night and write down
this stuff on a piece of paper I don't
say that once I'm talking about the
virtues of getting uh modern paneer
before it's all out of paneer you know
what I mean I have so then you can start
to see your own life that way and the
second uh compliment I got that
resonated with me was my eight-year-old
son now never reads anything but he read
your book and so I think there's
something to reading and books in
general that I'm always scratching at
which is I'm trying to expand the size
of the pie my writing veers slightly
different than yours like I'm aiming for
the big fat Mass I want the most
accessible writing possible because I
want the widest possible Market
um and when I get non-readers to read
that to me is a sign of the book's
Success non-reader's reading this is
kind of one of my big ultimate goals
and it's a topic that's enduring like
we're all taught sort of awareness of
gratitude and then that we should have
gratitude and nobody's sort of like
I don't know maybe I can't say nobody I
mean I am trying to think how I model
that for my kids just seems so cheesy
and hokey when you hear about it these
days you know it's like yeah well
Oprah's gratitude journal and like write
down five things on your bedside table
before you go to bed and like I mean
everyone's like yeah yeah yeah sure
but it's when you do it as a practice
when you go I always say to people the
best way to do it quickest way to do it
is go around your dinner table at night
and do rose rose Thorn bud have you
heard about this no so you say a roast
from your day that's something that was
a highlight for you a gratitude then say
your son says one okay your other son
says one whatever then another Rose then
a thorn which is something that did not
go well because you want to get it off
your chest you need to vent and the
other people need to show you empathy
okay and then a bud b-u-d which is
something you are looking forward to
tomorrow next week next year whenever
that little exercise helps you get all
the gratitudes in that the science says
really work emins and McCullough 10
weeks of five gratitudes a week makes
you not only happier but physically
healthier after 10 weeks so we know it's
a powerful punch to your brain to do
that but it puts it in a little around
the table dinner exercise that's just
quite like simple and easy to do why is
that effective though I I I like I have
a theory on this
um to my theory and you're going to
prove me wrong here in a second is
because I was thinking about this
researching
um speaking with you and also like the
things that I do at home and I'm like oh
these little moments of Joy are actually
really awesome but why are they awesome
and then I think a lot of it is just
adding perspective right so you get
almost like this flashlight with a
narrow beam and then you start oh like
I'm gonna find something that's really
nice so you widen it a little bit more
and then it's that perspective that
causes
um you just see things in a new way but
to get the perspective you're actually
reflecting and it's the reflection I
think there's something to do with that
reflection that actually drives this
sort of
um
drives the response
I don't know your brain is much bigger
than mine so I my instinct is to say
you're right no no can I add in can I
sprinkle some salt on that with a little
bit of The evolutionary biology stuff
um 200 000 years we've been around ish
right our species and um plus or minus
you know whenever they can backdate the
carbon dating of the first human body or
whatever and um
for the first
199 and 900 of those years we had to
fight for survival
luckily we there's something in our
brain called our amygdala it secretes a
fight-or-flight hormone and when you see
a saber-toothed tiger you know I gotta
fight that thing with to the death with
a stick or I gotta run the hell away
right and that served us very well we
went from a few scattered hundreds on
the African Savannah to the most
populous mammal on the planet we took
over this spaceship we won we eat all
the other ones for dinner literally like
we they used to eat us but we eat them
now you know and we won we took it over
in the last hundred years we no longer
need that 199 900 years of evolutionary
biology that has programmed us into
thinking if it doesn't kill me
I gotta kill it and I gotta run we now
live in an era of abundance and that
abundance is only skyrocketing think
about it that model I said you can press
a button in the carpets you have to
press another button and you got dinner
press another button then you got
entertainment like we just press buttons
now
so we don't need that that fight or
flight hormone as much yet it's still
there that is not well you're not just
going to evolve away your amygdala you
know you what are you gonna do so you're
gonna naturally have all the neural
Pathways to see negative stuff first
that is why it bleeds it leads people
always say to me why isn't there a good
news newspaper I'm like no one would
watch it they want to watch the fire we
want the race car crash we want the hard
hit in football we want that stuff that
we what they're like oh everyone's
rubber necking on the highway it's like
of course everyone wants to see the
accident we instinctively biologically
evolutionarily want to see it so this
gratitude stuff is actually practicing
to develop a whole new muscle carving
totally different neural Pathways to see
how awesome it is to be alive you got 30
000 days on this planet you will never
be as young as you are right now and if
you don't watch for all these tiny
little pleasurable moments it'll slip
away and you won't see them and life is
awesome
and the Gratitude stuff works because
then you're like whoa I'm so happy to
see you today Shane I can't wait to
shake your hand and thank you for your
time I love seeing the Farm Street
offices wow I can't wait to soak in your
bookshelf on the way out it's beautiful
like I I want to soak that in because if
I don't life's over and I missed it yeah
life is so brief and so fragile right we
think we naturally just sort of think oh
life expectancy is sort of say 80 or
something and I'm this old so I have
like all this time left in the future
but
um recently I mean I've seen a lot of
people that I know become sick or
sort of suffer some sort of catastrophic
injury
and life isn't long life is super short
and fragile and we always think that
we'll put off living until
or older when we retire we're going to
talk about retirement a little bit but
we always think we can put this off
until we're in a better place or we have
more time and but life there's this
quote by Mary Angelou that I love which
is it's on the wall in my living room
actually and it says life loves the
liver of it oh that's good and I think
it's so deep on multiple levels and it's
so easily accessible too right because
every day you wake up it's like this is
your your day right this you can live
your best life
um today and so one of the routines
we're talking about sort of like
routines for gratitude or perspective
one of the things that I taught my kids
to do
which I encourage all parents of young
children to do if they they're so
inclined is when your kids get out of
bed in the morning a lot of people send
them downstairs like go watch cartoons
because parents are a little slower to
wake up than kids I don't know if
everybody's kids are like mine like
they're up and out of bed and like full
bore in like 30 seconds right like I'm
dressed at like 5 a.m yeah yeah and so I
was like okay you can't get out of your
bed till seven like here's the rules
sort of right like at seven you can come
in my bed and we're gonna cuddle
and this is how we're going to start the
day and they're still doing it they're
10 and 9 although it's gone from like 30
minutes to maybe five to eight now but
we sort of talk about like what we're
looking forward to today like if there
was any lesson from yesterday from a
sort of an educational perspective I did
this and I got this outcome but that
wasn't what I wanted so I would do it
differently we just sort of like do the
spaced repetition on oh remember what
happened yesterday if you've encountered
this situation today like how would you
respond to that and then it's like what
are you looking forward to today and we
just spend a few minutes talking and
cuddling wow what an incredible practice
I'm very jealous I I want to do that now
I'm like I don't do that you can't come
in my bed and cuddle with me I
particularly want to cuddle with you
um but I think that's that's amazing and
uh it's about pausing and that's partly
why I always say life spend in days I
never refer to it as years
um I always refer to it as days I'm a
big fan of the Kevin Kelly Death Clock
idea
Kevin Kelly founder of uh Wire magazine
um keeps a clock on his desktop that has
uh expected lifespan subtract his
current age measured in days so if the
average lifespan which it is in North
America is 30 000 days and he happens to
have lived 21 500 of them that thing
will say quick meal do the math 8 500
and then tomorrow it'll say 8499 and
that
literally is the number of days he has
left a lot of people find that too dark
or too too like whoa oh man I think it's
empowering right it gives you
information that it's like you know what
I really don't want to spend my time
this way
from episode number 126 here is Nancy
Sherman so so what does being stoic mean
because I mean
um at a high level it's sort of like it
does appear to be embrace the suck
um so what does it mean how does it
differentiate from that how do we go
deeper so stoicism came to have a little
s in a way that really you don't see
with many philosophies I don't know we
don't talk about Aristotle with a little
less or maybe platonic so with stoic
the one that has come to us is kind of
almost through the British stiff upper
lip right passionless maybe the monarchy
best reflects it you saw it in all the
British tabloids when Prince Philip died
was the queen stoic enough that kind of
got is one strand of stoicism which is
try to manage your debilitating emotions
but it's not the only because if you
really read
more deeply the stoics with a big S have
the most sophisticated emotion Theory
there is in the ancient world there are
three levels at least of emotions what
what are those three levels
the skin in the game as I say in these
three ways one is
pre-emotions or proto-emotions
you know you shake
starts and startles
you hear a loud sound and your body
jumps a little bit or Seneca gives these
great examples you're if you're General
you could be the bravest most
stoic General but your knees knock a
little bit when you hear the the Clarion
call to start marching or you turn green
if you're in a shipwreck you know even
if you're a sage your body's talking
maybe not your mind it's your body
talking and you can feel all those and
they're probably very adaptive
um someone like Joseph Ledoux who's a
neurobiologist at NYU and studies all
the different levels of the brain you
know refers to that as a the sort of the
low road emotions through your amygdala
the limbic system fight fight we
sometimes say
or autonomic arousals they have so many
descriptions of them they're really
prescient in this regard they're very
forward-thinking The Next Step are ones
that can get you into trouble this is
the second layer and these are the ones
many of us
feel so we the way Seneca puts it so
he's now we're talking now a Roman
Statesman and writer and spin doctor
speechwriter for Nero he essentially
says that you can overstep reason
a little bit you can
once started these are hard to stop
and so they're the as if they're the
Proto emotions that you give Ascent to
that's their word you endorse them is
that like anger and fear and yeah anger
and fear full-throated anger and fear
and resentment
and revenge and also grief that won't go
away you know sort of the depression we
would might call it chronic grief these
days we might call it chronic grief
syndromes that just won't go away so you
you you endorse those first fleeting
impulses that have come in from the body
talking
and you run with them and you run with
them in a way where you can't stop Fear
desire
pleasure distress and under those four
everything falls essentially and they
get the body going as well as the mind
and essentially and and they're
essentially belief theorists about
emotions so they're cognitivists which
means it's not only in an Impulse that
you give rise to but it's it's a kind of
belief that guy was out to hurt me
and I'm gonna be angry at him and your
response to that to that ego bruises
I'm going to fight back in some way so
these are the all the emotions that if
you let them run run amok they can
derail you now the stoics are
developmentalists so in this regard
again they're really forward thinking
they're into moral development of the
emotions
because that's where they think you
really can
if you recalibrate your values it has to
be also with your emotions lining up to
what you believe to be the right values
so they think you should start trying to
cultivate
a good kind of fear and they actually
have a name for it which is cautiousness
they think you should start cultivating
a good kind of desire and I give it a
name and this is the third layer we're
into the third layer absolutely Shane in
this third layer is a kind of rational
desire so you're not going after
something with sticky acquisitiveness or
kind of sticky attachment so your
reasoning you're not reacting you're
reacting a bit but your reaction is
filtered through your reason
and it slowed down a little bit you've
had a chance to sort of press the pause
button a bit I mean you may not get
fully there this is in some ideal way
but this is what you're after you're
kind of trying to slow down the response
so that what you now come to think is uh
the right way to react and the right way
to see that thing outside that so
bruised your ego before isn't
necessarily as an insult you know maybe
the person was deluded maybe move on
don't get pissed off by it or something
of that sort I think of it as you not
stuck on the object of anger you're not
stuck on the object of Desire you're not
stuck on the threat out there you have a
kind of healthy aversion to threat you
have a healthy approach to things that
you want and you have a healthy well
they also give you one for Joy a healthy
pleasure that's that's maybe you know
this is their word rational exuberance
but you get the idea it's actually our
word for charity the Greek word is and
ch
and it turns into charity so it's a kind
of charitable disposition of
pleasurableness that comes along with
doing doing things so they're all calm
Equitable Serene kinds of emotions do we
get there
most of us not fully should we aspire to
get there yeah and so that third layer
is the one that you kind of wanna keep
in mind as you try to
stems some of the more debilitating
emotions that are hard to manage how do
we how do we do that though like so so a
lot of that sounds like that moment of
pause between the second and third layer
between feeling anger and then how do
you teach yourself not to reason but to
give yourself a pause so that you can
reason right and now your reason can
take control of your emotions like how
do we regain control of that so the way
they think about it is pretty graphic
they're thinking that you have some time
now we we know we don't always have time
but they're reconstructing it as if you
have time
so you get you get this charged impulse
that comes in he's insulting me you know
and then you get hot and heavy I'm going
to get pissed off I'm going to get angry
so they think that you can monitor your
impression we call it an observing ego
you watch yourself a little bit you
watch how you're reacting or responding
to the impulse or to that affront
and they even have ways of doing it
they're not going to sit you down in a
therapist's office right but they are
going to tell you at the end of the day
to do some journaling yeah this is what
Seneca says you know the night is the
night's quiet my wife is asleep she
knows my habits that's exactly what he
says and he says
you know I got a little bit too angry at
the doorman at the building who didn't
recognize me and didn't give let me in
very pedestrian kind of response I
wasn't seated at the head table at the
banquet where all the dignitaries were
I thought I should be
well maybe I'm a little too puffed up
about that so the pause is sometimes
built in in reflective moments and you
know that is what Psychotherapy is about
and they called themselves therapists of
the psyche the Greek word is therapea
therapy of the Soul or the psyche but
it's it's themselves with themselves
whether in letter writing or these
meditations they're called meditations
they're very discursive it's not like
Eastern meditation so why does that work
why does writing why is writing so
effective I mean my hypothesis is sort
of like it helps us reflect it helps us
clarify our thinking and helps us see
our thinking it puts a visual to it but
not only that it sort of like makes
sense of our experience to ourselves
it's that process for us
if you put words on your thought and you
actually articulate them a bit and you
drill that articulation into your head
they have actual practices you know
they're not just meditate at the end of
the day but think in advance
pre-rehearse some of the bad things that
could happen to you
at the you know during this day and that
will get you set up for it so they're
very much about emotions get their power
by having
words attached to them by being
discursive by being thought that is
articulated
we know there's a gap
between what you think and say and what
you actually do
it's there's not a perfect go-to there
at all and you know some of my more
radical colleagues in philosophy might
say you know we need
moral enhancement drugs
you know and they'll go in for Bio
enhancement that closes the gap between
cold cognition and hot emotion
so that we can really bring in line what
it means to kill that many people with
that drone strike
you may be able to say it in your head
but do you really know what that feels
like so we have to visualize and imagine
in order to give meaning to these uh to
the emotional empowerment and
sometimes it's not really just discourse
I think or just a words they're the
beginning psychotherapists as I say
they're you know in the tradition of any
kind of Freudian or what whoever follows
for it words a chatting putting words to
your thought helps to do some chimney
sweeping but we may also just have to
calm ourselves down
right we know that we know that some of
the sped up emotions really result from
are ticking too fast and we need to cool
down the autonomic system a little bit
and are there ways to do that that we
can use I think there are I mean two
things come to mind one is stoic and
then one isn't one of the stoic ideas is
you press the pause button or you insert
some space between the initial input and
the reaction
and so they give you some time they
think you can buy yourself some time
between say well you know all the all
the biases We Carry in our head that
lead to pretty unreflective responses
whether we're talking about police
brutality or sectarian violence or they
think that if you can kind of slow down
the initial impulse a little bit you buy
yourself a little bit of time now you
may have to have some of those responses
stored up from another time you know and
that would be when your journaling comes
in the other side of this is to turn to
Eastern practices which really are not
about
chatting away in your head but rather
the opposite not chatting in your head
kind of emptying it so various kinds of
mindful practices where you you know a
mantra may be the thing that allows you
to empty your head from episode number
88 Derek sivers and is that where you
come up with your directives oh the
directives
um
the directives I think
came from
sorry uh everybody listening
um Shane's talking about oh sorry yeah
something
something that I've blogged about a few
times which is this idea of taking
um taking an idea and turning it into a
a directive which is meaning telling you
to do an action
if you go to my site if you go to
sivers.org or if you read anything I've
written or even the TED Talks I've put
out into the world or whatever you might
notice that I like being very succinct
maybe not in conversation with Shane
right now but when I put something out
into writing I like being very very very
succinct I like chopping out every
possible word leaving only the words
that need to be there
so I noticed that as I was learning
about certain things I felt like most
books
use way too many words and I came to
this idea that probably the most
succinct way to communicate an idea is
to focus on the action itself like if
you command the action then the action
like a seed I think there's like a
nature metaphor in here somewhere that
the the action has the seed of the idea
in it that the action carries the idea
along with it you can talk for 400 pages
about calories and this kind of fat
versus that kind of fat and protein
versus that but instead you could just
tell somebody eat this don't eat that
like those actions would carry that 200
pages of information
in the actions and so therefore the the
succinct directives the actions please
my minimalist ruthless editor
sensibilities more I want to talk about
directives a little bit more and what's
interesting to me when I think about
attractives is
they're great if you can get them from
other people but they're different again
going back to this imitation versus like
knowing and understanding so you're
coming up with these directives like
you're doing the work the mental work
like you have an experience you're
reflecting on it that experience can be
yours or it can be from reading a book
or somebody else's story but you're
doing the mental work of reflecting
integrating digesting and then you're
coming up with these directives like so
much of Life Today is like just give me
the directive and we haven't done the
work
in space repetition like Anki uh SRS
flashcards a lot of people say you just
give me somebody's deck so I can learn
JavaScript or whatever I'm like no no no
no no no like the whole point
of flashcards and memorization it's like
after you've learned this thing you make
the flash card to help your future self
remember it like the flash card is not
the moment of learning right
that's so yeah I feel the same way about
the directives although there are
different subjects in life where I want
to know more
about this or not so the actually the
example that I gave about you know this
kind of fat versus that kind of fat and
these calories versus those calories I
don't care about that subject so much
so I would not want to read a 400 page
book about nutrition and diet that's an
example where I just want somebody to
tell me what to do tell me you know eat
this don't eat that
that's all I don't need the details and
so because I feel that way about
nutrition I can imagine somebody else
feeling that way about say technology or
stoicism or language learning or
whatever it may be like no I don't want
to talk around this subject for 300
Pages just can you tell me what to do in
in one page and then I'll just do that
like and I think this comes down to
trust if you trust the source then you
don't need all of the supporting
evidence I would add one caveat to that
which is I think and the environment's
not changing rapidly right so the The
Source came up with these
in a certain environment and you just
have to make sure that that environment
still exists because if it changes
rapidly then the source is likely to be
right but right at the time or right for
that particular environment and then you
won't know what happened
why would you be thinking of that in
April 2020 Shane
uh let's do a deep dive on directives
why don't you give me some of your
categories and like go through some I
don't want to put you on the spot but
oh sure I don't like how to be
anti-fragile or thriving in a knowable
world
this is like this is like your your uh a
talk show host and you say hey why don't
you perform one of your songs for us
sure I'll be glad to do that uh no
really I don't mind
um
all right hold on let me pull up we all
like the anti-fragile concept it's
particularly out right now too exactly
how to thrive in an unknowable future
and again to give context this is where
I've read a bunch of books on this
subject I took a bunch of these book
notes lots of paragraphs and kind of uh
condensed them down into these uh what
is it six directives one prepare for the
worst
since you have no idea what the future
may bring be open to the best and the
worst but the best case scenario doesn't
need your preparation or your attention
so mentally and financially prepare for
the worst case instead like Insurance
don't obsess on it just prepare then
carry on appreciating the good times how
to thrive in an unknowable future number
two expect disaster
every biography of a successful person
has that line and then things took a
turn for the worse
so fully expect that disaster to come to
you at any time completely assume it's
going to happen and make your plans
accordingly not just money but Health
family Freedom expect all of it to
disappear
besides you appreciate things more when
you know that this may be your last time
seeing them
three own as little as possible
depend on even less the less you own the
less you're affected by disaster
uh four and this is straight out of
anti-fragile choose opportunity not
loyalty
have no loyalty to location Corporation
or your past public statements be an
absolute opportunist doing whatever's
best for the future in the current
situation Unbound by the past have
loyalty for only your most important
Human Relationships uh number five
choose the plan with the most options I
got that one from Kevin Kelly
the best plan is the one that lets you
change your plans for example renting a
house is buying the option to move at
any time without losing money in a
changing Market
and number six avoid planning
for maximum options don't plan at all
since you have no idea how the situation
or your mood may change in the future
wait until the last possible moment to
make each decision the funny thing is I
posted that in
2016 on my site and I just like last
month in March 2020 in the middle of
quarantine and all that like went back
and read it just kind of smiling and
nodding like yep prepare for the worst
expect disaster yep dude this is like
gold I just want to sit here and listen
to you like keep going on this stuff
what are the other what are the ones
that stand we've got to do the Monger
one you and I are both hey hey actually
Shane have you heard of Charlie Munger I
think you would vaguely I mean I think I
remember coming across him in a headline
somewhere
so you and I are both Monger fans so
I'll just do this one more that is
totally a uh
not a rip-off but
um Charlie munger's idea I think it was
in poor Charlie Charlie's Almanac one of
his speeches to one of the schools where
he did the reversing It Like Houses for
misery guaranteed prescriptions for
misery how did you just happen to know
that
yeah thank you that was it and I just I
loved that format and so
yeah I tried my own version of that
which was how to stop being rich and
happy number one
prioritize lifestyle design
you've made it so it's all about you now
make your dreams come true
shape your surroundings to please your
every desire make your immediate
gratification the most important thing
how to stop being rich and happy number
two chase that comparison moment this is
from the book stumbling on happiness
you have the old thing you want the new
thing yes do it be happy for a week
ignore the fact that the happiness only
comes from the moment of comparison
between the old and new once you've had
your new thing for a week and it becomes
the new Norm just go seek happiness from
another new thing
number three buy not rent why rent a
house a castle a boat or a car when you
can buy it's not about the thing it's
about identity this shows who you are
now
number four internalize your new status
you worked hard to get here celebrate
relax admit that you're in a different
class of people now with different needs
understand there is no going back
number five how to stop being rich and
happy be a connoisseur
learn what others say is the finest
insist on only the finest you will now
be unhappy with anything but the finest
number six get to know your possessions
now that you own the best it's time to
focus on what you've got learn all about
the features of your new possessions
spend more time getting your surround
sound and your heated Floor Just Right
work out the whole solar panel charging
of your Tesla car this is important
and lastly number seven how to stop
being rich and happy acclimate to
comfort
eliminate every discomfort from your
life blame others when the world seems
hard and is not living up to your
standards that's so beautiful and so
true
from episode number 21 add Latimore
what's what's your philosophy of
happiness and what that means and how to
achieve it happiness is happiness is not
an average rate man it's it's a rate of
change do I go thinking and calculus
right if a person sitting still no
matter where they're at whether they
have a blood just use money person has a
bunch of money or no money
they just sit still and do nothing
in their life they're going to be
unhappy we tend to think of people being
rich and happy but no there's nothing
for nothing that pushes them nothing
that makes them grow and change you're
gonna be miserable and poor you can be
miserably and Rich you ain't miserable
in a relationship you can be miserable
single
what are you doing to push yourself all
happiness is in my opinion is a person
pushing towards something
not the avoidance part that struggle is
it's this weird type of intertwined
Duality and you're pushing towards some
pain is part of it happiness is like the
other part and they all kind of work
together and if you rest on your laurels
too long you'll become unhappy
but you always have to push towards some
man who had another person wants to be
have a happy life they must always have
a challenge to push towards this is why
I think the people I observe who are
great parents are not even great parents
or good parents there's a general I
don't want to call it lightness because
that's not correct
levity maybe I don't know um they they
feel the the
every day has a purpose because the
purpose is Raising this little person
and because his purpose there are goals
maybe not explicitly stated but but
certainly outcomes that one is trying to
achieve processes they're trying to
enjoy and I think that's why having kids
is does such a thing for a person they
say having kids makes you grow up makes
you mature whatever I think what it
really does is it makes you focus on
what's going to make you happy
and you got to make it happen in that
process and you quickly realize that
happiness is not
material
it's easy to have a temporary boost of
Happiness what a material thing but all
it is is a change in position there's
that rate of change once the change
doesn't happen anymore you're back to
being unhappy
so your whole life if you want to be
happy you got to push towards something
it doesn't matter what you push towards
doesn't matter what you want to be what
you're trying to become but you got to
be trying to come you have to try to
become something
you have an interesting philosophy on
that too you said don't don't tell
people what you're trying to become
just talk about what you have become
yeah man uh social media age right we
are infected with this
this disease of self-promotion but we're
not self-promoting what we've done we're
self-promoting what we plan to do and
then we get a bunch of people to go oh
man
good luck go forward you go girl
whatever you see and your brain this I
mean this is true there's a lot of
research on this your brain goes holy
look at all this approval we must
already did it why are we gonna keep
doing work now we're going to stack off
uh
there's just no benefit to talking about
what you've done
um at best case scenario you do it
all right
which is what you were trying to do
worst case you don't
and if you don't now you've told all
these people that you are going to but
there's nothing to show
so now what do you do you hop on what do
they call the dopamine Treadwell you get
back on and you talk about the newest
goal I mean I don't I don't know I don't
think I've seen you on Facebook at all
but I'm sure there's some version that's
on Twitter though Twitter tends to skew
kind of different in terms of the
activity that goes on amongst the users
you see every someone goes I'm trying to
lose this amount of weight or I want to
do this or I'm going to start this and
people go without a bunch of likes and
there's a big rally behind it
and then three months same they're
in the same spot nothing happened
nothing changed why because they got all
the validation you bring look
I'm never gonna be the guy that says
motivation doesn't count
for a thing and motivation is important
but it's a finite resource and it will
exhaust itself and when that falls off
you gotta rely on maybe habit system and
necessity all kinds of things to get you
through
but because that system is in place it
can be hijacked and one of the ways we
hijack it as we go and we we get all
this false recognition if
I've gotten I've gotten a reasonable
amount of recognition in my life for
things that I have done I'll tell you
what it's a lot it feels a lot better
and it's a lot less nerve-wracking when
a person congratulations or something
and then they can also go look it up
independently online and go oh okay all
right he really did that yeah
is but but if if a person but if I
Charming like when like a buddy tells me
wants to do something I go cool man I I
never ask about it again because I don't
want I don't want to stress them out I
know they ain't do it otherwise they'd
be they'd be all over it tell them I
would I wouldn't I wouldn't know all
about it right
but you you don't hear the result and
you talk about habits and systems there
uh
what's one habit you've changed recently
that's made a profound impact on you
do you want to know this is silly man
this is this is real silly but is it but
it's true
I washed the dishes as soon as I'm done
eating
how has that impacted you all right so
so I don't know if you you know when I
was growing up my mom used to do that
like right away you'd be like eating
your last bite and she'd be grabbing the
plate and yeah uh so I used to make that
bed up immediately when I got out of it
every morning
um but but I didn't and then I switched
it to the dishes what does this do
first of all it establishes some like
regularity
two I gotta do the dishes anyway if I'm
already up and moving around man I'm
telling you this is the best part about
studying Sciences right not not like
this the knowledge but the analogies you
can make man inertia is real the minute
you sit down you do not want to get up
and if you keep moving you don't want to
stop that's all a nurse is right and
objects you know resistance to a change
if it's a celebration
if you if I'm if I'm already up moving
around putting dishes in and I just
while I'm standing I go all right man
let me just do these dishes right now
now I don't have to think about it it's
already taken care of and when I sit
down to go do something else I don't
have to worry about doing work or rather
I don't have to worry about interrupting
my work to do that I don't have to worry
about going there to get the kitchen's
smelling funny I don't have to worry
about the cats creeping out I don't have
to worry about my girlfriend while I
cooked when them dishes gonna get done
you know I don't have to worry about
anything I have all I've done it's a
small thing but I've relieved so much
and maybe that maybe that is a
um a sign of how cool life is these days
that like that little hijack makes such
a big difference but I think the bigger
lesson is that if you can take advantage
of inertia
and just do things when you're already
moving so you don't have to stop restore
stop restart your life will be a lot
easier you you don't have a thing about
motivation to do your dishes or clean
your room or do your homework or
whatever you got to do or go running
it's why I get out of bed my secret uh
to getting up early is just to start
moving if you don't have to have to do
anything just don't sit down for 15
minutes you'll be you'd be surprised by
how I wake your almond is 16 you know
thanks for listening and learning with
us for a complete list of episodes show
notes transcripts and more go to fs.blog
podcast or just Google the knowledge
project
until next time
eyes